Okay, good afternoon.
Welcome to session 105,
the Tiger HIToolbox.
My name's Eric Schlegel.
I'm an engineer in the
HIToolbox group at Apple.
And I'm going to be talking to you
today about what's new in the HIToolbox,
HI services,
and navigation services frameworks.
I'm going to emphasize mostly what's
new since last year at the developers
conference since we did talk about those
and what was new in Tiger and those
frameworks a bit last year as well.
So to start out with,
I'd like to cover some of the things
we've been doing since last year.
It's been a pretty busy year
for the HIToolbox group.
We've had a number of
deliverables in 2005,
starting with Evan Prusha,
son of our engineer Brian Prusha,
followed by Ewan McLeod,
son of our engineer David McLeod.
We also have a Fullerton
to be named later,
son of our engineer Guy Fullerton,
coming out soon.
And finally,
we have a Rothart to be named later,
son of our engineer Kurt Rothart,
also coming out soon.
So you can see of the
six people in this group,
four of them are new
parents in recent months.
And that explains why I'm the
one up here on this stage giving
you this presentation today.
They're all busy taking
care of their kids.
So we did do one other thing.
We shipped Tiger.
So that's what I'm going
to talk to you about today.
Here's what I'm going to cover today.
I'll start with a review from last year,
some of the things that we talked
about at last year's developers
conference that were new in the
toolbox already at that point.
I'll cover in much more depth
what's new this year and the things
that we've done since last year.
Then Brian Prusa will come up and
tell you about the HI archive API,
which is a way to save out
HI objects of various forms as
well as other core foundation
data types to memory or to disk.
And also give you a little bit
of information about what's
new in navigation services.
Then I'll be talking a bit
about compatibility tips,
ways to make your applications
run well on Tiger.
And then some other changes in Tiger,
changes in other parts of the
operating system that can still
affect your Carbon application.
And then finally we'll have some Q&A.
Okay, so what is HIToolbox?
At the most literal level,
it's a framework.
It lives in system library frameworks.
But it's not really an
application framework,
like PowerPlant or AppKit or Mac app
or Mac Zoop or many of these others.
It's more of a user interface tool kit.
It's something you use to
build your user interface,
but it doesn't have a document
architecture or an undo
model or things like that.
So as we think about what to do
with toolbox in the future and
where we want to go with it.
We tend to think about who are
some of the typical clients
for the application toolbox.
One of the big clients for the
toolbox are developers doing
cross-platform development,
people writing applications that
run both on Mac OS and on Windows,
maybe on versions of UNIX or Linux.
And these developers have told us
commonly that having a procedural API on
Mac OS X is a good thing because it gives
a good corresponding API for things that
they've used on other platforms as well.
Another set of important clients
for HIToolbox and the Carbon API are
developers using a proprietary or
third-party application framework.
Often these developers have millions
of lines of code that they've already
written to their custom framework,
and it's very difficult or
impossible for them to move to
some Apple-provided framework
or other third-party frameworks.
Another set of clients are
those of you who are still doing
development for classic Mac OS.
This is getting smaller every year,
I know, but there are still a number of
people who are doing development that
needs to run on classic Mac OS for
the education market and for other
markets where there's still an
installed base of these machines.
and having the ability to write
an application that works both
on the CarbonLib shared library
on classic Mac OS and on the
Carbon frameworks on Mac OS X is
really valuable to these developers.
Another set of clients are those
of you who are using a code
base that may be incompatible or
difficult to use with Objective-C.
We have lots of developers still who
are using languages such as Lisp,
Pascal, Fortran, Modula 2 or Real Basic,
languages where it's a little
awkward to call into Objective-C but
somewhat easier to call into a
procedural API such as Carbon.
And finally, but I hope not least,
I hope a lot of you use
Carbon because you just like it.
We've tried hard to build an API that's
easy to use and that's enjoyable and
that can help you get your job done,
and I hope you agree.
So we try to keep all of these developer
clients in mind as we think about where
the toolbox should go in the future.
As we planned the work for Tiger,
we thought about some overarching
themes to give us some guidelines about
what kind of work we wanted to do.
And to give you sort of a
mental framework for what I'm
going to be talking about,
I want to cover some of those
themes with you so you have an
idea of where I'm coming from.
One of the big themes for Tiger in
the Toolbox group was to continue
the transition to compositing mode.
Hopefully you all know by now
that compositing mode is a new way
of drawing your window content,
which we introduced in Mac OS 10.2.
And in this mode,
all of your window content
is drawn as part of a custom
control or custom HI view.
[Transcript missing]
Another theme for Tiger was
support for voiceover.
That's our technology for
doing spoken user interfaces.
We have sort of two tracks for voiceover.
The first track is supporting the
accessibility APIs in the toolbox
itself and in our standard controls.
So we've tried very hard to make
sure that all the standard controls,
all the standard widgets and
user interface provided by
HIToolbox is accessible in Tiger.
And the other track is providing
APIs and Carbon events so that your
application can become accessible itself
and make your own content accessible.
Fourth theme for Tiger was
support for Spotlight.
We don't really have any APIs or
Carbon events to support Spotlight,
but we do have user interface changes
so that you can do Spotlight searches
directly from within navigation
services open and save dialogs.
Another theme was to improve
Carbon-COCO integration.
We know that a lot of you are
trying to use Cocoa technologies
in your application,
and we think that's great.
We want you to continue doing that.
We see the future of
Mac OS X application development as
really being one where applications
aren't really Carbon applications
or Cocoa applications,
they're just Mac OS X applications,
and they use whatever API is
applicable or suitable for
their particular task at hand.
So our goal is to make it much easier
for you to use Cocoa technologies
in a Carbon application and
indeed vice versa as well,
so that you can choose the right
API for the problem you have.
And finally,
we want to always continue to
solve common developer problems.
Those things that you run
into every time you build a
Mac OS X application using Carbon,
the things that are annoying
every time you do it.
We just want to solve those,
get it out of the way,
so that you never have
to deal with it again.
So a quick review of what we talked
about at last year's developers
conference for the HIToolbox.
We covered resolution independence.
As I said, there are three modes,
framework scaled mode, app scaled mode,
and the default magnified mode.
We covered some expanded HIView APIs.
We're trying to increase the
set of HIView APIs available in
HIView.h and make sure that for
each API that is in controls.h that
still makes sense that you want to
have an HIView equivalent of that.
So that instead of having to go back
and forth between controls.h and
HIView.h and figure out which API set
applies in this particular instance,
you just have one consistent
HIView set that's easy to learn,
that makes sense in all cases,
makes it easier to document,
easier to apply in your applications.
Along with this,
we also talked about introducing
some APIs to do mouse tracking
regions at the HIView level
rather than at the window level.
A mouse moves into and out of the
tracking region are sent directly to
the view rather than to the window.
And second, if you need to move a
view inside your window,
say you're scrolling or you're just
repositioning a view back and forth,
by using the new HIView
tracking area APIs in Tiger,
the tracking area moves along with
the view rather than you having
to move it explicitly yourself.
We also talked about
some HIShape support.
HIShape is a new data type,
floating point data type,
that replaces the
QuickDraw region handle.
And we're adopting that across the
HIViewManager so that we can use
HIShapes to specify control regions,
structure regions, content regions,
things like that.
And finally,
a request that we've heard a lot from
developers over the last few years is
the ability to easily be notified before
and after changes to an editing field,
and edit text control, let's say.
and we talked about last year
that we were introducing some
Carbon events that would be sent in
these two cases before and after.
Those weren't completely functional
in last year's release of Tiger,
the developer preview release.
But the good news is that in Tiger GM,
those text change notification events
are sent regardless of whatever
change is being made to an edit field.
They're always being sent.
The only exception would be if
you explicitly set the text of an
edit field with set control data.
But they aren't set in that
case because we figure you
know what you're doing then.
So those text change notifications
are fully functional now and I think
that will help make your life a lot
easier in a lot of different cases.
Okay, so now I'm going to go right
into what's new from last year.
And I'll just go manager by
manager and give you some details,
some highlights of the things that
we think you will want to know
about for your Carbon application
when you're running on Tiger.
The appearance manager.
The thing we're trying to do with the
appearance manager is to make sure that
the application is running on Tiger.
And the purpose of the appearance
manager really is to make it easy
to use the appearance manager to
draw with core graphics and to use
core graphics drawing in conjunction
with appearance manager drawing.
So to that end,
we have some new APIs here.
HIThemeSetStrokeColor,
HIThemeSetFillColor,
and HIThemeSetTextFillColor which
take a theme brush or theme text
color and put the corresponding color
or pattern into a CG context so that
you can draw into the context using
that theme brush or theme text color.
Previously,
there wasn't any way to do that.
You couldn't do this at all, basically.
And if you needed to draw with a
theme brush or a theme text color,
you pretty much had to
fall back to Quick Draw.
Another API we have here is
HITHeamBrushCreatCGColor,
and that takes a theme brush
and gives you back a CGColorRef.
The CGColorRef is a core graphics
data type that can then be
passed around your application.
It can be applied to
multiple different contexts,
and that gives you better
performance than using just
HITHemeSetFillColor each time,
for example,
because the CGColorRef encapsulates
a lot of the data and avoids some
of the performance hit of actually
applying and converting a theme
brush into the context every time.
We also have some appearance manager
APIs to draw some of the new controls.
We now allow you to draw
Panther-style tab controls
using the Appearance Manager,
for example.
That wasn't previously possible.
And we have HITHeamDrawSegment to
allow drawing a segmented view.
Oh dear.
Please ignore the video errors.
That's going to be a
little difficult though,
isn't it?
All right, well,
I'm going to keep talking.
Also, HITHeamDrawTextBox now has
some implementation changes
so that it can work outside
of a 16-bit coordinate range.
So if you have a window with
a great deal of content,
maybe you have a large number of
files or a large number of fonts
that are being scrolled up and down,
HITHeamDrawTextBox can now be
used to draw that no matter where
you are in that scrolling range.
Well, I can see the slides here,
but you can't.
So hopefully my explanations
will be clear enough.
Carbon Event Manager is
the next slide I'm on.
And first I'd like to point
out a new Carbon Event,
KEventWindowGetClick modality.
And this is an event probably most
of your applications won't use,
but it's used when you need to customize
the behavior of a click -- yay,
all right -- of a click in a
window behind a modal dialog.
Normally the toolbox will just block
that click and emit a sys beep.
But in some cases,
applications may need to
actually customize that behavior.
So you can now use this event to
actually intercept the click or let it
be passed through to the clicked window.
We also support a keyboard focus hotkey
for putting focus on a drawer window
that's attached to the active window.
And your application doesn't have
to do anything to support that.
It's all automatic.
It just happens.
Finally, a change to menu command event
routing that I want to cover.
In previous versions of the OS,
when you sent a command event,
kEvent command process or kEvent
command update status to a submenu
and the submenu didn't handle it,
the event would then go
to the user focus target.
In Tiger, we're changing that somewhat so
that instead of going directly
to the user focus target,
the event proceeds up the
parent menu chain until there
are no parent menus anymore.
Then it goes to the user focus target.
That could be particularly
useful if you have a menu with a
number of hierarchical submenus.
Maybe you have a font menu with a
bunch of submenus and you want to have
the parent menu be able to control
some of the command updating and
command processing for the submenus.
This way you can install your
handlers just on the parent
menu and not on every submenu.
every single submenu as well.
You still see?
Yes, you can.
Okay, good.
HIViewManager.
We have some new
coordinate conversion APIs,
HIPointConvert, HIREctConvert,
and HISHapeConvert,
which are used to take points, wrecks,
and shapes from one view
system to another view system.
But they can do more than that,
because we already had
that capability before.
They can also go from view coordinates
to global coordinates and vice versa.
And even more significantly,
they support two different
global coordinate systems.
They support a pixel-based
coordinate system,
but also a 72 DPI point-based
coordinate system.
And especially as your
applications are modified to
be more resolution independent,
you may find that the point-based
coordinate system is useful,
because that is independent of the
actual display hardware and just gives
you sort of a virtual coordinate space.
Also, along with the support for HIShape,
we now have support for drawing
and invalidating views outside
of a 16-bit coordinate space.
We have additional support for CG images.
It's been a very common request from
developers to be able to use CG image
refs with the standard controls.
So, as you can see,
we now have support for
CG image refs in push buttons,
round buttons, bevel buttons,
pop-up buttons, data browser headers,
and I think a few others as well.
Another CG image change in
the HIV manager is a new API,
HICreateTransformCGImage.
Some developers have found when they're
writing custom controls that display
images that they want to be able
to directly imitate the appearance
that the toolbox will give when a
control is selected or disabled.
So for example, on the left side we
have an original image.
In the middle we have a disabled image.
And on the right side we have that
image drawn in a selected state.
And previously there wasn't
any good way to take a CG image
and apply those transforms to
it to get the resulting ones.
We now have an API to let you do that
so that you can write custom views that
exactly match the toolbox appearance.
[Transcript missing]
The Data Browser.
We've added some long requested
features ever since ITunes came out.
People have wanted support
for alternating row colors
in the Data Browser.
And we now have support
for that built in.
Another thing that we have now built
into the Data Browser is column dividers.
And you can see it's column divider is
just a vertical line between columns.
Both of those are accessed
via a new set of APIs,
Data Browser, Get, and Change attributes.
So these are just attribute bits
like many other Toolbox APIs use.
We have a slight change to the
appearance of the popup button
cell in a Data Browser cell.
The old appearance drew the
actual popup button control,
which was kind of bulky and didn't
really fit into the appearance
of a ListView cell very well.
So we now have this new
buttonless popup menu appearance,
which is un-matched.
And it's much sleeker and doesn't
really take up as much space and
just generally fits into the general
table appearance much better.
And finally we have some new APIs,
Data Browser, Get, and Set Metric,
which allow you to change the amount
of white space and separation around
text and icons in a ListView cell.
Interface Builder has a bunch of new
features I want to run through here.
Support for the Placker, Window Header,
and Segmented Views.
You can see those are highlighted in
the Interface Builder screenshots here.
We have support for
Control Text Foreground
Colors and Justification,
so you can now set those directly
inside Interface Builder.
Also some new Window Attributes,
specifically the resolution
independent Window Attributes,
the Framework Scaled and
Application and scaled attributes,
but also in window menu
and does not cycle.
Window resizing limits,
the minimum and maximum sizes
for a window can now be set
directly in Interface Builder.
And one last feature I want to highlight,
which is pretty cool,
which is automatic window
positioning based on display size.
So the problem this is solving is
that you're designing your user
interface on your 12-inch PowerBook,
and you have your window positioned
halfway across the screen and
two-thirds of the way down,
and you run your app on
your 12-inch PowerBook,
and it works great.
That's where the window comes up.
But then you transfer your app
over to your desktop system with
your 30-inch cinema display,
should you be so lucky as to have one.
And you run your application and
the window is way up there in the
top left corner of the screen.
And that's because IB is just saving
the absolute coordinates of the
window bounds and they don't change.
So using this automatic window
positioning in the window inspector,
there's a new little section there where
you set springs and rods on a window.
And that can let you specify that
a window should be proportionally
located on the display where it's
loaded relative to its location on
the display where it was designed.
So if you put the window halfway
across and two-thirds of the
way down when you design it,
and you open it on a much larger
display or on a much smaller display,
it'll still be at that
same proportional location.
The Menu Manager doesn't have any
new Carbon events or APIs this year,
but it does have some user interface
changes that I'd like to highlight
so you're not surprised by them.
The first one is Menu Bar Type Selection.
We now support being able
to type select a menu title.
Previously we just supported
menu item type selection.
So when you first put focus on the
menu bar using the keyboard hotkey,
only the Apple menu title gets
highlighted and the entire
menu does not get opened.
Then if you type something, type ARR,
you'll end up selecting
the Arrange menu title.
At this point you can press Return or
Enter or Spacebar and the entire menu
will open and you can type select.
Of course this particular thing
isn't quite a Carbon specific thing
because since Cocoa also uses the
Carbon Menu Manager you get this
effect in Cocoa applications as well.
And the other change is
Pop-up Menu Selection.
This is especially useful if you are
using the keyboard to access your
menus or to open pop-up menu controls.
So if there's a pop-up button
control and the menu has a
particular item that is checkmarked,
when that menu comes up,
that particular checkmarked item is going
to be pre-highlighted now so that you
can use the arrow keys to move directly
to the next item or the previous item
very easily without having to start
from the top or the bottom of the menu.
MLTE, the Multilingual
Text Editor or TextEntion,
also has some new APIs.
There's going to be a whole
session about this tomorrow,
I think, so you can go and find
out more about this,
but I'll just give you
some highlights here.
MLTE now supports the
Cocoa Spellchecking Panel,
so you can very easily build
spellchecking support into your
application that uses MLTE.
It also supports the
Cocoa Font and Typography Panels.
It has some new APIs to let you do more
sophisticated scrolling behavior when
text is inserted into an MLTE field.
It has some new APIs to do more
sophisticated undo group support to
control how different actions are
grouped together and then undone.
And finally,
some new features to allow you to
read from and write to a CFURLRef.
Universal access is sort of
a general term for a bunch of
different features in Mac OS X that
support the use of the operating
system by users with disabilities.
And one of those features is the
zooming feature that is meant
for use by users with visual
disabilities with low sight abilities.
And it magnifies the entire
screen by a user-specified amount.
Now the problem, of course,
is that if you magnify the entire screen,
well, some part of the screen is going
to get forced off of the edges
of your physical display space.
So the question is,
how do you actually determine which
part of the screen should be displayed
on your physical hardware device?
For example, let's see,
here we have a screenshot from
a magnified version of TextEdit.
And you can see the insertion
point is kind of right at
the right edge of the screen.
So if the user were to
press the right button,
or the right arrow key a few times,
that insertion point would move
off the right side of the screen,
and you'd lose it.
It would be off the
physical display hardware.
So to prevent that problem,
the zooming feature in
Universal Access scrolls the entire
zoomed area of the screen off to the
left to keep that insertion point
visible on the physical display device.
Now, how does it know where
the insertion point is?
Well, someone has to tell it.
In the case of the
built-in operating system,
the editing engines,
we already do that for you.
So we're already telling the zoom
feature where the insertion point is.
But if your application offers its own
keyboard accessible user interface,
then you need to explicitly tell
the zoom feature yourself where the
current focus of the user's attention
is so that the zoom feature can stay
focused on that particular point.
So we have some new APIs here.
UA Zoom enabled tells you whether the
Zoom feature is currently enabled.
UA Zoom change focus is what you'll use
to give the global coordinates where the
user's locus of attention currently is.
That's an assertion point or some other
way of indicating where the focus is.
So typical uses,
if you're writing your own
word processor or spreadsheet,
these often provide keyboard access
to objects inside the document,
some kind of other
graphical object editor,
or really the whole idea is anything
where the user isn't using the mouse
to indicate where their attention
is because the Zoom feature already
knows how to track the mouse,
but is using some other modality
to indicate their attention,
which might be keyboard,
but it could even be speech
or something else like that.
In those cases,
you'd want to use these APIs to tell
the Zoom feature where the area that it
should be paying attention to should be.
Okay, Carbon-COCO integration.
We've made a bunch of changes
here to solve a lot of the common
problems that developers run into
when using Cocoa technologies
inside their Carbon application.
One of the biggest ones is the use of
unified Core Graphics window levels.
Carbon and Cocoa used to use
different Core Graphics window levels
for floating and modal windows.
We now use the same window levels for
those particular types of windows.
So that solves a lot of
problems where a Carbon window,
Carbon floating window,
couldn't come in front of a
Cocoa floating window and modal dialogs
got in front of floating windows
or vice versa and things like that.
Those of you who have run into those
problems probably appreciate this fix.
KHICommandSelectWindow is a command
ID for a command event which is sent when
you click on a window if that window is
using the standard window event handler.
We are now sending that command event
for all clicks on windows that use
the standard window event handler
even if the window is already active.
That makes sure that if you have
a Carbon document window and a
Cocoa document window in the same
application that the Carbon window
is always going to order in front of
the Cocoa window when it's clicked.
We've also made some changes
that are focus-related.
We had seen some problems
where if you had,
say,
the focus on a Carbon document window and
you clicked into a COCA floating window,
sometimes the focus
wouldn't move properly,
or maybe it wouldn't move
properly back the other direction.
So you could wind up with two different
blinking insertion points or two
different controls in different windows
that both drew their focus rings.
Properly from one window to another and
released by the window that it's leaving.
And also some changes to the standard
controls in Carbon so that they only
draw focus rings if their owning window
is the current user focus window.
And finally,
auto-release pools are an issue
that a lot of developers run into
when trying to use Cocoa technology
in their applications.
Cocoa requires the establishment of an
auto-release pool before you call into
Cocoa code because it's used for memory
management for properly keeping track of
objects that need to be released later.
And it was awkward and sometimes really
very hard to establish those pools,
if you were using, say,
run application event loop,
because you didn't have any
control over that core loop,
the core event loop,
the toolbox ran that loop for you.
So we now establish auto-release
pools for you in several cases,
including in run application event loop,
in run app modal loop for window,
modal dialog,
and when drawing the content
of a compositing window.
In all those cases,
you can rely on the pool being present.
The Cocoa team as well
has made some changes.
I'd just like to highlight
some of them here.
We've improved the behavior
of floating windows.
Previously, if you had, let's say,
a font picker window,
a Cocoa font picker window
in a Carbon application,
that font picker window was
essentially treated as a document
window to the extent that the
Carbon APIs dealt with it,
which meant that it would
steal activation away from
your document windows.
It could become active when
your application was active.
So that's changed now,
and those Cocoa floating windows
are now really treated as
Carbon floating windows as well.
So they don't steal activation,
they don't appear in the Windows menu,
and they properly hide when the
application is hidden as well.
The Cocoa team has also made some
changes to improve focus behavior so
that the Carbon user focus and the
Cocoa key window status properly track
each other as they move back and forth.
So when the Carbon user focus changes,
the key window status
changes and vice versa.
And finally,
if you've tried to use KEvent
class application events
in your Cocoa application,
you may have noticed that your
handlers simply weren't called.
And that's now been fixed as well
so that you can now use KEvent class
application events inside a Cocoa app
and your handlers will be called.
Okay, one little note here.
Due to changes for the auto-release
pools and also for the HIArchive API that
we're going to be talking about later,
the HIToolbox framework now always
loads the foundation framework
and the Objective-C runtime.
That's a change from previous
versions of the operating system
where those frameworks and runtimes
weren't loaded unless you explicitly
called code that used them.
Well, we are explicitly calling code that
uses them now because the auto-release
pool API comes from Foundation,
and the HIarchive API uses the
NSKeedArchiver API from Foundation.
So those things are going to be
loaded into your applications,
but you shouldn't see any
runtime changes from that.
And I'd also like to point out one
little difference in the implementation
is that HIObjects are actually,
in a sense,
derived from NSObjects now and can
be treated as an NSObject at runtime.
So although we don't -- we're
not currently saying that
we officially support this,
it is possible to say, you know,
"My HIObject retain" or "My HIObject
release" using the Objective-C syntax.
Okay, that's it for the
beginning of my session,
and I'd like to bring
up Bryan Prusha now,
and he's going to talk about some
navigation services and HIarchive.
All right, thank you, Eric.
I'd like to begin talking about
some of the changes that we've made
for navigation services in Tiger.
The first and most obvious
change is support for Spotlight.
You can see in the upper
right-hand portion of the dialog
that we have a search field.
and also a finder style scope
bar which can be used for
narrowing your spotlight search.
and support in the sidebar
for finder save searches.
And of course, as you support the
Navigation Services API,
you'll get all of that for free.
No code change is necessary.
Now, the next thing that we
did is added a new API,
specifically for filtering
in Navigation Services.
So traditionally,
we've only offered the ability to
filter based on an array of OS types.
And this worked for a long time, but,
you know,
along came Mac OS X and extensions,
and that paradigm began to break down.
So we wanted to go one step further
than just adding extension support.
So now with the
NavSetFilterTypeIdentifiers API,
we've added support for you to
pass an array of uniform type
identifiers to Navigation Services.
So this has multiple features.
It subsumes the behavior of both OS type
filtering and extension filtering,
as well as offering the advanced uniform
type identifier conformance hierarchy.
And in addition,
UTIs all have a display name.
And so we can just provide that
for users in the enabled pop-up.
In this case, you can see that I've
passed this nav dialog,
public.image and public.text.
These are meta types in uniform
type identifier hierarchy.
And so they refer to all types
of images and all types of text.
So as you can see in the dialogue,
because I'm filtering by images,
you can see GIFs, pings,
all sorts of image formats
being filtered at the same time,
very simply.
Now let's say I want to
sort by text instead.
Oh, but wait a second.
There's been this longstanding bug
where when you change the enable popup,
some of the icons will update,
but the text doesn't.
And this has been confusing for users.
And it's kind of subtle.
and this subtlety is really
part of the main problem.
So we've gone ahead and made sure that
since we're working with filtering,
we wanted to make sure that the nav
dialog updates properly in all cases.
So your users will no longer
have any confusion in this case.
There were 33 duplicates on this bug,
so there's at least 30
of you that are happy.
All right.
That's enough for navigation
services right now.
I'd like to move on to HIArchive.
As has been mentioned a couple times now,
HIArchive is a new API for Tiger,
and it's wrapped around
NSKeyedArchiver that Ali talked
about in the previous talk,
if you were here for that.
So it's a mechanism for
taking live objects in memory,
whether HI objects, so HIViews, windows,
menus,
or core foundation property list types,
like collections, like arrays,
or CFString, CFNumber, things like this,
flattening out into a CFData,
an architecture-independent
binary format.
Now this binary format is very small,
compact, does some cool things
like string unique-ing,
and offers a table of contents
for quick access to your objects.
Now later on,
when you want to pull information
back out of the archive,
Your objects will all be reinstantiated
with the same state they had when they
were written out into the archive.
So for a lot of people,
the word binary will
throw up some alarms.
And so I wanted to make sure that
you knew that you could use the
PLUtil property list utility to
convert your binary archives into text
XML if you want to use that format.
But I highly recommend maintaining
the binary format for deployment,
just for performance reasons.
Now, Interface Builder does not support
archive-based nibs at this time.
But it will in future releases.
To that end, we've added support in
the existing Nib APIs,
iBCarbonRuntime,
to look into the Nib and see if
there is an archive format sitting
next to the traditional XML format
for interface builders' information.
If that exists, it will prefer that.
So in a future version of Mac OS X where
you can write out archive-based Nibs,
those Nibs will be backwards
compatible to Tiger.
Let's talk a little bit about how
you as a client will use HIarchive.
The two main tasks you want to do are
encode your data and decode your data,
pull all your objects back out.
So in order for the encoding step,
you'll call HIarchive
create for encoding.
This will give you an HIarchive
ref that is used explicitly
in the encoding set of APIs.
So don't try and pass it
into the decoding APIs.
You'll get an error.
Now with this HIarchiveRef,
you'll pass each of your objects in
turn to HIarchiveEncode's CF type.
In addition,
you'll pass a string which uses a key,
like the key value pairing
used in CFDictionary's.
This key is important because it will be
used to pull information back out later.
So when you're done writing all
your information into the archive,
go ahead and call HIArchive
Copy Encoded Data.
This will take all the information
that you've written in,
squish it down in that
nice little binary format,
and pass it back to you as a CFData.
Now when you have the CFData,
you can write it out to disk,
put it on a pasteboard,
send it to another application,
do whatever you want.
It's just data.
Now later on, your application will want
to pull this back out.
If you've written a bunch of views
in Windows as your user interface,
you'll want to load
this up at launch time,
something along those lines.
So you call HIarchive create for
decoding with the CFData that
contains your binary HIarchive.
This will pass back another
HIarchive ref that is used explicitly
for the decoding set of APIs.
Then for each one of your objects,
call HIarchive copy decoded CF type
using the CFString keys that you
wrote into the archive to begin with.
And then each of your objects
one by one will be reinstantiated
with the state it had initially.
Now the HIarchiveRef is a CF type,
so make sure to use call
CF release on it when you're done.
I've mentioned that you can use
HIarchive with core foundation property
list types as well as HIobjects.
So let's talk about how you can support
the HIarchive protocol in your HIobjects.
There are two events,
kevent-hiobject-encode and
kevent-hiobject-initialize.
Each of these will hand you a
kevent-param-hia-archive parameter.
So this is the HIarchive ref that you
will use to write your information into
the archive and pull back out later.
So when the client requests
for you to encode your data,
you'll identify your
object's persistent state,
And write that into the archive
using the APIs that I just went over.
And then make sure to call your next
event handler so your superclass
gets a chance to encode its data.
For instance, if you're in HIView,
you want to make sure that the base
HIView class can write out things
like your size and position and title,
all those kind of common features.
Then later when the client requests that
you pull yourself out of the archive,
you'll get the initialize event.
Now this is the same initialize
event that you are sent normally now
when somebody calls HIObjectCreate.
The difference being that when
you are given the HIarchive ref,
you want to instantiate your object
from the archive rather than by default.
Now, the great thing with writing
information out by key is that,
first of all, not all of the information
has to be there.
If a key doesn't exist,
assume that you're using
the default format.
So you can just use a default
initializer in that case.
Now, if you have a newer version of your
object that writes some information out,
you might write out three keys.
But if you move that back to an older
version of your application that
only understands two of those keys,
it can just ignore the third key.
And so there's a great amount of
backwards and forwards compatibility
with the archive format.
And again,
make sure to call your next event
handler so that it can have a chance
to initialize itself from the archive.
Once you handle the HIarchive protocol,
make sure to call hiobject
setArchivingIgnored to false.
It sounds a little backwards,
but it's useful.
This tells the toolbox that you
handled the archiving protocol,
and it knows that it can
send these messages to you.
The reason why it's settingIgnored
to begin with is because
clients can call this also.
Typically, you will call this within
your initialization event,
but clients at any time can call
this API on subviews in a window to
guarantee that those pieces don't get
archived out and can be pulled back
and can be initialized later manually.
Now, this is important because you
want to keep your HIarchive small.
The smaller they are,
the faster they load from disk.
So keep that in mind.
Don't write out too much data,
only as much data as you really need.
Now, I'll go more in depth on
this in a session tomorrow,
session 116, building a custom HIV.
In that case, we'll be dealing with
an HIV specifically,
not HIObjects in general.
And there will be plenty
of sample code available.
It's a hands-on session.
So the last thing
I just want to touch on,
if your application-- or in your
application you want to edit HIArchives,
you might take advantage of the
HIObject set custom archive data API.
This allows you to add some custom
bits to an object that will get written
out into the archive automatically.
So an interface builder style
application might use this to write
out initialization parameters.
And so you can check out hiobject.h
and hiarchive.h for more documentation
on these specific features,
as well as documentation
on the ADC website.
Now with this,
I'd like to move to a demo of HIBuilder.
HIBuilder is some sample code that
we've been working on that takes
advantage of the HIarchive APIs.
Now, to begin with,
I'd actually like to show
you interface builder here.
I'm going to create a new nib.
We have a window in there,
and I will add a menu.
I'm just going to make sure we don't
have the default information here.
Let's do something mildly interesting.
Let's add some buttons and so on.
All right.
I'm saving this to the desktop.
And I'm quitting Interface Builder.
Now I'm launching HIBuilder.
And HIBuilder has a feature
where you can open NIBs.
What it does is it does some very
simple parsing of the XML data,
identifies all the top level objects,
and uses the existing IB Carbon runtime
APIs to pull the information out.
So you can see that we have
the menu that I modified and
the window with all its pieces.
Next, I'm going to save this archive.
I'm going to save this
archive back into the Nib.
I'm going to save it with a special name.
objects.aib.
So this mirrors the objects.xib
file that it sits next to.
Now, again, this is what will cause
your existing code,
your existing IBCarbon runtime code,
to pull your information out of
the archive rather than the nib.
So you can get some
performance enhancements.
Now I could just save this archive
out separately and load it manually
through the HIarchive APIs as well.
So I'd like to show you some things
you can do with HIArchives that
you can't currently do with NIBs.
For one thing, you can take all kinds of
HI objects and archive them.
This is just a base HI object.
and you'll eventually be
able to add parameters.
We'll be releasing the source code
shortly after the developer conference.
But because it's an archive,
we can also write out core
foundation property list types,
so strings and arrays and so on.
and something that a lot of people
have wanted for a long time.
This is specifically useful
for navigation services.
Navigation services has a custom area,
and typically, when you mock up your
interface in Interface Builder,
you have to put all your
custom views into a window.
So you pull the window out of the Nib,
using the i.b.
Carbon Runtime APIs,
and then pull out all your custom views,
destroy the window,
and then take those views and put
them into Navigation Services.
Now you can just have an
HII view as a top-level object.
Now I'm going to say it allows subviews.
And now I can just start loading
it up with all my custom interface.
And so again,
I'll save this out to an archive.
And then at runtime,
I can just messing around with a window.
So I hope that gives you an
idea of what HIBuilder can do.
And again,
the sample code will be available
shortly after the developer conference.
So with that,
I'd like to hand things back to Eric.
The last bit of the presentation covers
some compatibility tips and other
changes in other parts of the operating
system that may affect your application.
So,
compatibility tips are generally things
where we have changed something about
the implementation or maybe we fixed
a bug in the toolbox and we found
that this affects applications in
ways that they may not have expected
because they were not expecting that
particular bit of implementation or
that particular bug fix to change.
They're not generally things where
there's a defined behavior in the
API that we're changing but more
something that happens inadvertently.
The first one of these is
a good example of this.
Add event types to handler is an API in
the Carbon Event Manager that lets
you add extra event types to an event
handler to be handled by that handler.
And it turns out, we found out recently,
that this API has had
a bug in it since 10.2.
It worked properly in 10.0 and 10.1
and we rewrote some stuff in 10.2 and
broke the way that it behaves slightly.
So that events added to a handler got
dispatched in slightly the wrong order.
So we fixed that for Tiger.
But it also turns out that some
applications have come to depend
on the particular behavior
that it had in 10.2 and 10.3.
These apps were never
actually run on 10.0 or 10.1,
so they were never tested
against the correct behavior.
They were only tested against
the incorrect behavior.
So I'm not going to go into explicit
detail about exactly how this changes
the order of event dispatching,
because I kind of need a blackboard
and a piece of chalk and lots
of diagrams to explain it.
But we have detail in the
HITooLbox release notes about
exactly what's changed here.
And if you use this API,
you probably want to take a look
at the release notes and read
about exactly what's changed,
and that'll help you understand whether
it may be affecting your application.
The menu bar window is another
example of something that's changed
in the implementation that's
affecting a lot of applications.
The menu bar in Tiger is now
drawn into a real window ref
using a compositing HIView.
The window ref is a compositing window.
And that's done so that we can get
resolution independence for free for
the menu bar because the menu bar
window is using framework scaled mode,
as I mentioned earlier,
and then the toolbox does
all the work for making it
resolution independent for you.
But a lot of applications don't
expect to see a menu bar showing up
in their window list right at the top.
They think that the first window
in the window list is going to
be their active document window,
for example,
which hasn't really ever been a great
assumption because you could always
have other windows in the window list,
say a text services manager bottom
line input window or help tag
window or various other things.
But a lot of apps have
gotten away with this so far.
So to maintain compatibility
with existing applications,
what we're doing here is
for the get window list,
and get front window of class APIs for
existing CFM and Mako applications,
we will silently ignore the menu
bar window and just skip over it.
So you won't see that window
come back from those APIs.
But if you have a Mako application that
you rebuild on Tiger and relink against
the Tiger versions of the frameworks,
we'll remove those compatibility
workarounds on the assumption that
you've then had a chance to deal with the
problem and fix it in your applications.
So that at that point,
get window list and get front
window of class will start returning
the menu bar window since it is a
window and it's in the window list.
So if your application is using get
window list or get front window of
class or the front window API to figure
out what the front most document window
is or the active document window,
we recommend using the active
non-floating window or front
non-floating window APIs instead.
Another change that's tripped up
a few applications is the change
to the standard window levels.
That are used by the
standard window groups.
As I mentioned earlier,
we're now using the same core
graphics window levels as Cocoa.
It turns out that some applications have
been manually changing the window levels
used by the standard window groups.
And they aren't expecting us
to be changing them as well.
So the message here is if you
are changing the window levels
of the standard window groups,
you probably don't need
to do that on Tiger.
And also avoid making assumptions
about the window levels that are
used by the standard window groups.
You can call get window group level
to find out the level that the toolbox
has provided for a window group.
And there's actually some other
new APIs to let you find out the
window levels that are used when an
application is active or inactive
because in some cases it can change.
And try to dynamically set your
own window levels based on the
ones that the toolbox is using.
The sending of command events
containing the KHICommandSelectWindow
event to all windows,
even when they're active,
if they're clicked,
has caused problems for a few apps
that handle this event themselves.
So the key here probably is that if
you handle the KHICommandSelectWindow
command ID in your command event handler,
check to see if the
window is already active.
And if it is already active,
you can probably just pass the
event through and you don't need to
update your own application state.
Finally, the HIViewRender API has changed
behavior slightly between Panther and
Tiger in the sense of how it validates
other views that are being drawn
in conjunction with the view being
the view that was passed to the API.
The Tiger behavior is actually
more correct in that we validate
less of the other views,
only the portions of views
that actually get redrawn.
Panther validated too much.
But again, it turns out that some
applications accidentally
depended on the Panther behavior.
So our recommendation here is twofold.
First, we highly recommend that you only
use the HIViewRender API with
the root view of a window.
The root view will have the
same validation behavior
on both Panther and Tiger.
So that will avoid the whole problem.
And second, if you do need to pass a
non-root view to HIViewRender,
which should be -- which
should be extremely rare,
just take a look at the release
notes which talk in more detail
about exactly how the validation
behavior has changed and see if
that might affect your application.
Some other changes in
Tiger that I want to cover here.
First, the Carbon Core framework,
which provides the
Carbon File Manager and
many other managers,
has a new file copying API,
which is the same API that
the Finder uses to copy files.
And this entirely replaces all the sample
code that Apple has released in the past,
fs copy object and things like that,
for doing file copying.
So we highly recommend that you
look at this API and adopt it
in your applications if you need
to do file copying yourself.
And that's because the file copy engine
in Tiger knows how to copy some of the
metadata that can be attached to a file,
such as the extended attributes
or the access control lists.
And any of your existing file
copying code just isn't going
to copy that stuff at all,
because it was written before
APIs existed in order to do that.
So you can use this API in both
synchronous and asynchronous modes.
In the synchronous mode,
you just call fs copy
object sync or fs move.
And in the asynchronous mode,
you create one of these fs operation
refs and then run it asynchronously.
And you can get progress
updates and status notifications
in that case as well.
Another change in Tiger I'd like to
highlight is the status of Quick Draw.
And we've been telling you for
quite a while-- and we certainly
reiterated it earlier this week at
the Graphics and Media State of the
Union-- that you want to move off of
Quick Draw and start using core graphics.
And to make that official in Tiger,
Quick Draw is officially deprecated.
Its status as an API has
become deprecated in Tiger.
This doesn't mean we're
removing the API entirely.
It's still there.
Your applications can still call it.
They'll still run.
And in fact, it's still there on
Mac OS X for Intel as well.
But it does mean that we are putting
you on notice that we're not going
to do any more performance changes or
performance enhancements to Quick Draw.
Those are all going into core graphics.
We're not going to fix any
more bugs in Quick Draw,
except for things that are
absolutely required for compatibility
to keep applications running.
So what you see right now is
what you're going to get for as
long as Quick Draw is supported.
There's not going to be
any improvements there.
So you definitely want to,
if you haven't already,
start moving off of
Quick Draw and onto core graphics.
The other big advantage of
moving to core graphics,
of course,
is that it will make it much easier for
your application to become resolution
independent in the future as well.
HImovieView is a new HIview
that the QuickTime team has
asked me to talk a little about.
It's a view that is provided in
QuickTime 7 when it's running on Tiger.
and it is now the preferred way to put
QuickTime movies into Carbon Windows if
you're using one of the standard
views built into the system.
So it's a full-featured HIView.
It's been rewritten to use Carbon events
and use all the standard functionality.
You can load them from Nib files.
You can put them in composited windows.
You can scroll them around
inside a scroll view,
that sort of stuff.
It uses the visual context
API in QuickTime 7,
so that gives you some performance
advantages when you're doing
live resizing and really helps
the QuickTime playback system
leverage the GPU rather than
putting the playback on the CPU.
And so just in general,
on Tiger you want to be looking
at using HIMovieView rather than
the older Carbon Movie Control,
which is essentially just static
at this point and won't see any
significant improvements going forward.
Coalesced updates is something that the
core graphics team has done in Tiger that
may have effects on your application.
You may have also heard it
called deferred updates.
And I want to sort of explain
how updates work generally to
give you some background here.
When you draw into a window,
windows are double buffered on Mac OS X,
so you're actually drawing into
the window's off-screen buffer.
And the bits that you've changed
don't get displayed on the physical
hardware until Core Graphics comes
along and takes those bits and sends
them out to the display hardware.
That's a process called flushing.
Now the flushing process happens
in most cases automatically because
both HIToolbox and AppKit will
automatically flush your windows
when you hit the event loop.
So if you're calling into the
event loop on a regular basis,
then all your windows are
going to be flushed by default.
However, some of your applications may be
explicitly flushing as well if you're
doing things that draw into a window,
but then you don't run the
event loop for a while.
You need to explicitly flush to make
sure those changes come to the screen.
So pre-Tiger,
when a flush request happened,
Core Graphics immediately grabbed
the bits out of the windows
off-screen buffer and sent them
off to the display hardware.
And that's fine,
except that if you have lots of
applications all doing this at once,
you wind up with a serialization effect.
So each application has to wait for
the flush request of all the other
applications that got in before it did.
And that can have some significant
performance degradation.
So in Tiger,
what the Core Graphics team has
done is they are now coalescing
all these flush requests together.
So no matter how many
applications you have running,
all of their flush requests are
going to get batched together,
and they'll all be delayed until
the next display refresh cycle.
And at that point,
all of them will be sent
out to the display hardware.
So this improves performance when
you have lots of applications
all flushing at once.
It eliminates the tearing that
may have been seen in the past.
But it can also reduce
performance for some applications.
Applications that are explicitly
flushing and doing so very often can see
a reduction in performance due to this.
Because previously, once they flushed,
if they drew again after the flush,
the flush would happen pretty quickly.
The drawing operation gets blocked
until the flush is finished because you
can't draw while Core Graphics is taking
the bits out of the window buffer.
You need to wait until the
buffer has been properly updated
off to the display hardware.
But as long as the flush happens quickly,
your draw operation can
continue pretty quickly too.
On Tiger, however,
the flush operation gets delayed
until the next refresh cycle.
And that means your next drawing
operation after the flush gets displayed
until the next refresh cycle as well.
So if you have a loop where you're
doing a flush and then a draw
and then a flush and then a draw
and then a flush and then a draw,
a lot of your drawing operations
are going to get blocked.
And you're going to wind up being
held to the display refresh rate
where you might have been able to run
faster on previous versions of 10.
So because of this potential
issue for some applications,
the Coalesced Updates feature is
only enabled for new applications,
Mac OS applications that are
linked on Tiger and later.
It's not enabled for any
existing applications.
All of your CFM applications,
all of your Mac OS applications
that were linked on Panther do not
get the Coalesced Updates change.
However,
when you take your Mac OS application
and relink it on Tiger,
you are going to start seeing
the effects of Coalesced Updates.
So you will need to deal
with this as you move
So we have some
recommendations here for you,
for how to best work in a
world of coalesced updates.
And the first recommendation
is pretty simple.
Don't flush explicitly
if you don't have to.
The HIToolbox already is
flushing on your behalf.
And in most cases,
you don't need to flush yourself.
But sometimes you do.
And in that case,
the next recommendation is just
don't flush too frequently.
You don't need to flush more often
than the display refresh rate.
The display isn't going to be
redrawn more often than that anyways.
So if you flush more often
than the display refresh rate,
it's not going to do you any good.
You're not actually going to see
anything that you're flushing anyways.
So you can ask for the display
refresh rate for the main
display from Core Graphics.
And if you need to flush explicitly,
just keep track of the
time that you last flushed.
And if the amount of time since
then that has elapsed is less
than the display refresh rate,
don't flush again.
Just wait until that next refresh
rate interval has elapsed.
Also, you don't need to draw too often.
If your display is refreshing
at 80 cycles a second,
80 hertz,
and you're drawing at 200 hertz,
half of your frames aren't going to
show up on the display because they'll
get overwritten by the next frame and
the user isn't even going to see them.
So you really don't need
to draw any faster than the
display refresh rate either.
Finally, if you want to explore what the
effects of coalesced updates may
be on your application even before
you rebuild it as Mac OS on Tiger,
you can use the Quartz Debug application
to explicitly turn on coalesced
updates for all apps across the system.
Now that's not a mode you
might typically want to run in,
but it's useful for performance
testing to just see how your
application is going to behave once
coalesced updates is enabled for it.
So here's our summary.
The goals of the HIToolbox team.
Well, we're here for you, basically.
We want to address your requests.
We want to do the things that
you need us to do to make it
easy to write your applications.
We want to support new technologies
as they come out from Apple so
that those technologies can be
integrated into your applications.
In general,
we just want to make it easy to
write a great Mac OS X application.
Carbon's a great API for doing that,
and we want to continue to see you
writing those Carbon applications.
What we want from you,
we want you to write custom HI views.
And when you're doing that,
we want you to use compositing
mode and core graphics.
That will give you better performance,
and it will make it much easier
for your applications to become
resolution independent in the future.
We want you to make your
application accessible.
That's not only for the needs of
users with visual disabilities,
but as you saw in one of the State of
the Union addresses yesterday,
accessibility is a really cool feature
for other things like scriptability and
inspection and being able to introspect
about what's going on in an application.
And it can really add a lot of value
to your application if it's accessible.
And finally,
please tell us what you need.
We're not mind readers.
You may be butting up against
this particular problem
every day and thinking,
darn, haven't they fixed this already?
But if you don't tell us about it,
we're not going to know.
So please, tell us what you need,
file bugs,
put feature requests in radar as well.
We also have this email
address for feedback,
HIToolebox-feedback@group.apple.com.
This replaces an older address,
toolbox@apple.com,
which is no longer in service.
So if you have specific bugs
or specific feature requests,
please put those in Radar.
But if you just have general conceptual
feedback or general questions,
this is a great address and we'll
try to answer your questions there.
More information can be found
in the HIToolbox release notes,
which go into a lot of detail about
what's changed in the toolbox in Tiger.
Those are on developer.apple.com,
the most recent versions
on developer.apple.com,
and also in the Xcode
documentation update that was
released a month or so ago.
There's also a Q&A that DTS has put out
about how to use HIMovieView on Tiger.
Let's see.
And some other sessions coming
up that you may want to go to.
Right after this one,
it's going to be voiceover
and Carbon applications,
talking about how to use accessibility to
make your Carbon application accessible.
There will be a session on
HITextView and MLTE and the new
features available there in TIGR.
And tomorrow,
we'll have an in-depth session
on building a custom HIView.
And we're going to go into -- we're going
to cover a lot of issues that we haven't
covered in previous years when we've
given sessions about building HIViews,
things like doing text input and
keyboard focus and accessibility.
We have a feedback forum on
Thursday where you should all
come and tell us what we're doing
right and what we're doing wrong.
And also the application
technologies lab is open all week.
I'm going to be there tonight and
I'll probably be there tomorrow
night and we'll have other
people there during the week.
That's not -- despite the title,
it's not just about HIView.
You can really come in and ask us
any kind of HIToolbox question.
and we'll see what we
can do to help you out.